# VI editor

## about

To edit a text file, multiple editors exists (graphical and command-line)

Vi (or vim) is a powerful editor for the command-line,
but not easy for beginners.
With a bit of work however, you can easily edit files via the command-line.

Other well-known editors are nano and emacs.

With *vi* you can edit files from anywhere on any kind of terminal
(some may have known old green terminals...)

It targets plain text files, this is not an editor (nor the others...)
for Word documents for example (which may anyway be behind the scene some
xml documents and editable, but you won't have the expected layout!).

There are two modes in Vi.
Insert (or Input) mode and Edit mode.

In input mode you may input or enter content into the file.

In edit mode you can move around the file, perform actions such as deleting,
copying, search and replace, saving etc.

A common mistake is to start entering commands without first going back into
edit mode or to start typing input without first going into insert mode.
If you do either of these it is generally easy to recover so don't worry too
much.

## Use

When we run vi we normally issue it with a single command line argument
which is the file you would like to edit.

    $ vi filename  # creates or edit file if it exists

I will give here some help/tips but I strongly encourage you to look at manuals/tutorials on vim on the net (many good ones exists!).

Once in the editor, you'll get something like

    ~
    ~
    ~
    ~
    ~
    "filename" [New File]

You always start in edit mode so the first thing we are going to do is switch to insert mode by pressing **i**.
You can tell when you are in insert mode as the bottom left corner will tell you.

    ~
    ~
    ~
    ~
    ~
    -- INSERT --

Now type in a few lines of text and press Esc which will take you back to edit mode.

## Commands

In edition mode, it is possible to execute some commands.
Vim includes predefined commands and can be extended with plugins.

For example, in edit mode type

    :set number

This will display line number in editor

    :set nonumber

will remove line numbers.

Sometimes (depends on install defaults), it is difficult to copy some
text via mouse selection (selecting some text and right click for copy
not working), you need to disable the *automatic visual mode*.
Visual mode helps to select entire lines or blocks
[more info](http://vimdoc.sourceforge.net/htmldoc/visual.html)

To see if your are in visual mode, you will see

    ~
    ~
    ~
    ~
    ~
    -- VISUAL --

In this case, in edition mode:

    :set mouse-=a

## Save and exit

There are a few ways to go about doing this.
They all do essentially the same thing so pick whichever way you prefer.
For all of these, make sure you are in edit mode first.

If you are unsure if you are in edit mode or not you can look at the bottom
left corner. As long as it doesn't say INSERT you are fine.
Alternatively you can just press Esc to be sure.
If you are already in edit mode, pressing Esc does nothing so you won't do
any harm.

* :q! - discard all changes, since the last save, and exit
* :w - save file but don't exit
* :wq - again, save and exit

Most commands within vi are executed as soon as you press a sequence of keys.

Any command beginning with a colon ( : ) requires you to hit *enter* to
complete the command.

Save and exit the file you currently have open

## Other ways to view files

vi allows us to edit files. If we wanted, we could use it to view files as
well, but there are two other commands which are a bit more convenient for
that purpose. The first one is cat which actually stands for concatenate.
It's main purpose is to join files together but in it's most basic form it is
useful for just viewing files.

    $ cat filename

If you run the command cat, giving it a single command line argument which
is the file we just created, you will see it's contents displayed on the
screen, followed by the prompt.

This command is nice when we have a small file to view but if the file is
large then most of the content will fly across the screen and we'll only see
the last page of content
For larger files there is a better suited command which is less.

    $ less filename

less allows you to move up and down within a file using the arrow keys.
You may go forward a whole page using the SpaceBar or back a page by pressing
*b*. When you are done you can press *q* for quit.

  $ more filename

more will display file content by blocks of line from the start. Pressing
*enter* will go to next block, and *b* will go back to previous block.

Have a look at the file you just created now using both these commands.

## Navigating a file in Vi

Now let's go back into the file we just created and enter some more content.

In insert mode you may use the arrow keys to move the cursor around.
Enter two more paragraphs of content then hit Esc to go back to edit mode.

Below are some of the many commands you may enter to move around the file.

Have a play with them and see how they work.

* Arrow keys - move the cursor around
* j, k, h, l - move the cursor down, up, left and right (similar to the arrow keys)
* ^ (caret) - move cursor to beginning of current line
* $ - move cursor to end of the current line
* nG - move to the nth line (eg 5G moves to 5th line)
* G - move to the last line
* w - move to the beginning of the next word
* nw - move forward n word (eg 2w moves two words forwards)
* b - move to the beginning of the previous word
* nb - move back n word
* { - move backward one paragraph
* } - move forward one paragraph

If you type :set nu in edit mode within vi it will enable line numbers.

## Deleting content

We just saw that if we want to move around in vi there are quite a few
options available to us. Several of them also allow us to precede them
with a number to move that many times.

Deleting works similar to movement, in fact several delete commands allow us
to incorporate a movement command to define what is going to be deleted.

Below are some of the many ways in which we may delete content within vi.
Have a play with them now (also check out the section below on undoing so that you can undo your deletes.)

* x - delete a single character
* nx - delete n characters (eg 5x deletes five characters)
* dd - delete the current line
* dn - d followed by a movement command. Delete to where the movement command would have taken you. (eg d5w means delete 5 words)

## Undoing

Undoing changes in vi is fairly easy. It is the character u.

* u - Undo the last action (you may keep pressing u to keep undoing)
* U (Note: capital) - Undo all changes to the current line

## Taking it Further

We can now insert content into a file, move around the file, delete content
and undo it then save and exit. You can now do basic editing in vi.
This is just touching the surface of what vi can do however.

There are many vi cheat sheets out there too which list all the commands available to you among intestinf stuff:

* copy and paste
* search and replace
